Hello and welcome to the Haskell Weekly
Podcast, a podcast about Haskell.
Haskell is a functional programming
language that we use here at ITProTV,
and we're just super
excited about this episode.
I'm your host Cameron, and
with me today we have Taylor Fausak,
our lead engineer here at ITProTV.
How are you doing Taylor?
>> I'm doing well, thanks.
How are you Cam?
>> Can't complain.
It's going well, I would say.
>> Full of fries?
>> I just ate so many fries, ugh.
It was so good.
But today, I just wanna kind
of talk about an architecture
that is a good functional architecture.
It is Ports-And-Adapters.
And what are Ports-And-Adapters?
So I'll kind of talk more about Ports
because that's really what I wanna do.
So Ports are kind of responsible for
interacting with the outside world and
that could be a web app, it could be
the database layer, a way to communicate
with the outside world [CROSSTALK]
>> It's the thing that's making a call to
the database or to some external
service that you're using or
even writing to the console.
>> Exactly, yeah.
And adapters are kind
of everything inside,
kind of handling all the business logic.
>> Okay.
>> Being able to kind of going hey,
this is what this is.
>> So adapters take their input from the
the ports and then do some other stuff.
And then what talk to another
port talk to another adapter.
>> Just depends on what
the flow you know of your-
>> So it could be either one.
>> Right if you have an internal structure
that needs to talk to another internal
structure you'd be using adapters.
But if you needed to call out to
the database, you'd be using a port.
>> Okay.
>> Kind of,
it kind of keeps things together,
not so much, not so jumbled.
It kind of keeps it clear,
the boundaries between pure logic and
input-output logic, right?
>> Right, and so you mean,
the pure logic is what a lot of
people sometimes call business logic.
The interesting stuff that your business
is doing, or your application is doing.
>> Right.
>> And the ports handle the, maybe not so
interesting stuff have actually performing
an HTTP call, or something like that.
>> Exactly.
>> Okay, so now that we have kinda
the vocabulary of this architecture,
could you explain in more detail
what the architecture is?
>> Kind of the Ports-And-Adapters
architecture allows
us some niceties around it.
So it kind of allows us to separate
that input-output stream from
the internal business logic.
And it keeps our the ability to test
internal business logic easier,
cuz you're not always interacting with
some input-output that could mess
with the result.
>> Yeah, it's a lot easier to test a pure
function because if you have to write
a test that,
let's say interacts with the database.
Then that means to run your test suite,
you have to have your database up and
running and
your schema has to be up to date and
you may have to have fake
data populated in there.
But if you're testing pure code,
you just have to have a bunch of values
in memory which are a lot easier to make.
Also, you can test things in parallel if
they don't have to talk to a database.
Cuz maybe you have two tests for the same
piece of business logic in your code and
they would both be writing
to the same database table.
You're gonna have a bad time unless you
really do a good job of separating those
things out.
Whereas in pure code, you can just run
two things at the same time, no problem.
>> Right, and at some point,
some level, you want to test the ports.
You want to make sure that
given a set of input,
you're getting a reliable
source of output.
Because that's what you
expect from an API.
You're saying the same thing
to an API you would expect,
it's returning to the same values.
>> At some point you want that
integration test to prove that your API
actually works.
>> Right, but it does-
>> But the unit tests on the inside,
those are still really valuable.
>> Right and the integrations are still
a little more boilerplate kinda set up
generally.
And they're a little more,
I won't say in bases, but
they're definitely a little
more meaty per se.
So it's nice to be able to
have that separation and
have guarantee that the pure functions,
they're gonna do what they need to do and
those individual units
are gonna perform as intended.
But we also can create this test for
the ports as well.
>> Yeah.
>> To allow that kinda testing.
>> So Cam, we're talking about this
architecture today because of this blog
post that Mark Seaman wrote
called Functional Architecture is
Ports-And-Adapters.
So pretty straightforward.
But he makes a point in there that you can
do this architecture in other languages.
He uses F+ as an example.
But in those languages, it can be really
hard to have the discipline to force
yourself into this
architecture constantly.
And if you ever mess up, then suddenly you
have something that is both a port and
an adapter, and
it becomes hard to tease those apart.
What is it about Haskell that helps
us write programs that are in this
architecture and
get these benefits from them?
Yeah, the ability of purity, in types.
Types systems enforces a lot
of need to have type A,
cross the boundary is type A still.
Like it shouldn't be able to
change across the boundery.
>> Yeah, and we've mentioned purity a
couple of times, and I just wanna be clear
about what we're talking about
specifically with regards to ASCII.
It's a function that doesn't operate in
I/O for our purposes at least at ITPro.
That's typically what we mean by pure or
not in our like application level handler.
>> Right.
>> Something that you give it a bunch of
inputs and it gives you an output.
End of story.
Whereas impure code is something that
has to be executed in some context,
either with a database connection or
with I/O or whatever.
So when we're talking about pure
functions, that's what we mean.
>> Right, right, right.
You know, we read through this
article I'm a little bit in.
It's about Ports-And-Adapters
in school and stuff like that.
But kind of talking about is a lot
different than implementing it because
in reality, Haskell kind of forces out
hand this like And we don't have to
really think about what the architecture
really is in the grand scheme of things.
>> Right, it forces you to do this
architecture without having to be
consciously aware, thinking,
I'm implementing Ports-And-Adapters here.
>> Right.
>> Instead, you say, ih,
this function suddenly needs I/O,
so I have to put it in the type.
And it propagates out everywhere.
And then that encourages you to try to
constrain the places where that's used to
say, no let's only I/O
over here at the boundary.
And keep everything else pure.
>> Yeah, and on our code base here,
we're very adamant about that.
If we see that, we're passing the monastic
context through all of these functions,
we don't necessarily always need
the database connection every single one
of those functions.
We should take a step back and say, why
don't we just find the data we need and
then pass it to a pure function that
allows us to have a little more certainty?
And not have to worry too much
about passing this working
in- [CROSSTALK]
>> Instead of passing this
giant implicit context around them,
basically the whole real world.
You identify the little pieces
of that that you do need and
turn them into regular function arguments.
>> Right.
>> And in the course of doing that
refactoring, sometimes your function's
signature can look more complicated,
because it's getting more arguments.
Instead of just being an I/O,
or app, or whatever.
But conceptually it becomes
a lot easier to reason about.
Because just looking at that type
declaration, you know those are the only
things that has access to use
that's all it's gonna do.
>> Right.
>> This is especially nice for
a long running,
a long lived application where many
different developers are working on it.
And people are maintaining it,
fixing bugs.
And you get that confidence on that
pure code when you repack or something,
you haven't accidentally broken some other
part of the system that relied on some
internal state that that
thing fiddled with.
>> Right, right, right.
Yeah, and
I highly value that with Haskell.
It really makes, and there's a few of our
podcasts we talked refactoring in general.
And how easy Haskell makes that.
But the the type features just,
it makes it easy to understand.
Okay, we're going to pass
all of these things in, and
we're going to adapt them to
the type we want them to be, right?
Okay, adapter, right?
Crazy, guys.
>> That's where the name came from.
[LAUGH]
>> Wow, [SOUND].
But that that's the nice aspect of
Haskell is being able to read and
know, okay I take these arguments and
I transform them and
I adapt them to be the type I'm returning.
Whereas a lot of other languages
that's not always the case.
And it's not easy to understand, wait,
why am I trying to keep
these boundaries separate?
There's other languages,
just not as clear.
>> Right, it can be hard to tell looking
at a function, if it's pure or not.
In Haskell,
it's very clear if that's the case.
And it's interesting because this blog
post by Mark reminded me of an earlier
screen cast by Gary Bernhardt
who did that famous JavaScript
talk where he shows up all these kinda
weird cases of JavaScript behavior.
But he has a screencast
where he talks about this
concept of functional
core imperative shell.
Which is very similar where all of
your business logic on the quote and
quote inside of your application is pure.
>> Mm-hm.
>> And then you have a very small layer on
the outside that's responsible for
collecting stuff from the outside world,
passing it off to your application and
then taking that result and
sending it back to the outside world.
>> Right.
>> So
it's funny how this concept of either
functional core imperative shell or
Ports-And-Adapters keep showing up in a
guy who works with Ruby full time or Mark,
I think he does a lot of F sharp,
C sharp kind of the .NET world.
Or even like you mentioned in computer
science curriculum, which is often Java or
Python or something like that.
>> Right, very object oriented.
>> All these language ecosystems have
recognized that this is a powerful,
useful architecture to
set up your applications.
But in Haskell It's just
the way that you do things.
There's it's almost harder to
not follow this architecture.
>> Right.
>> So I see a lot of benefit and
using a language that pushes you
in the right direction like that.
>> Yeah, cuz obviously if all
these people are using it,
it's not wrong, like it's-
>> Probably not a bad idea.
>> Right, like there's probably
other options out there.
But the fact that it allows you to
protect your internal business logic from
the outside world, that's important.
>> Yeah.
>> You don't want to be able to just come
in and immediately from the outside world
somehow modify some of the internal
business logic and
Haskell doesn't really allow it to happen.
>> Yeah and
it can be even more benign than leaking
details about your business logic.
One example I've seen before is, in Ruby,
there is a templating language which
is basically a wrapper around Ruby.
And there had been times where you can
have a template, that inside the template,
it makes a call to the database.
And if you put that inside in your
template cuz you're like listing all of
your users and you wanna get some
associated object with them.
You could be making a thousand queries
in your template of all places.
And templates feel like they
should be pure functions.
>> Right.
>> Like don't talk to the database,
you should already have
the information you need.
>> Right.
>> So, this architecture helps you
avoid problems like that in addition to
a bunch of others.
>> Right, and it's not to say that like,
like you said,
it's just harder to make Haskell
not be Ports-And-Adapters.
I can go through code we've written
when we were first starting Haskell and
just, we would pass this
giant contacts all around.
And we're gonna find data here,
here and here and
always be talking to the outside world.
And kind of over time you kind of realize,
this just doesn't feel right.
And so Haskell allows you
to refactor that out too.
Like we can make you make this one piece.
>> Yeah, and
that feeling of this isn't quite right.
That's Haskell nudging you in
the quote unquote right direction for
this architecture and
where a lot of other languages kind of
push you away from this architecture.
Haskell pulls you in, so
it's, yes, keep doing that.
That's the right thing.
>> You can do it.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Right, I think there's, a nice,
Ports-And-Adapters allows you
to kind of see that outside,
you've got various aspects that
are that are calling your API,
your code base whatever that may be.
>> Yeah, we talked about API's
a lot cuz we do web programming.
So that's kinda our bread and butter.
>> Right.
>> But this applies to other
applications as well.
>> Right, and allows you to see okay,
what has the possibility to talk to.
What does it have
the possibility to talk to?
And then inside it allows you to
kind of keep all of those functions
that allow you to be agile and quick and
reuse and have these validation functions.
Or having like auth checks or
stuff like that,
depending on what your object case is.
That's calling out and finding a user and
understanding what app
permissions they have.
That could probably involve more of a port
than you're wanting to use in that case.
But it just kind of allows you to
keep all that logic just so separate.
And not feel like, I don't know,
I feel like there's been times,
and there's frameworks that do kind
of force your hand in this and
other languages, right.
Cuz there's MVC, right.
MVC kind of, in my mind can translate
into Ports-And-Adapters in some regards.
>> Yeah, cuz your controller ends up
usually being a port where it's collecting
information from the outside world.
And then your view is kind of a port in
that it's presenting that information
back out.
And then your model is typically
an adaptor in that scenario.
>> Right, right and we,
using sales when we're in JavaScript land,
that kind of kept that stuff separate.
They get hairy at times, like, we can find
ourselves like in a service pretty much
doing all the time controller action.
When the idea of a service is really,
it should be more than an adapter.
And say hey take these outputs and
I give you this output.
>> Right.
>> Rather than like we're gonna call out
to this service and that service and
we're gonna build this giant thing for
you.
And the controller's just going to say,
I'll listen here and
I accept request here.
>> Yeah.
>> And then I enter to service,
that's a big thing.
And that's just a super hard to go back
into and understand like it doesn't
like yeah, MVC could be like
Ports-And-Adapters but it's not, it's not.
It's easy to not do that.
>> And nothing is pushing
you in the right direction.
>> Right.
>> You said that shoving all this stuff
into the service didn't feel right but
that was just kind of a gut feeling.
There was nothing in the language or
the framework telling you,
maybe don't do that.
>> Right.
>> Whereas in Haskell, you do get, you
know, I have to propagate I/O through all
these functions or
I'm passing in a hundred arguments.
This is very clearly telling
me something is wrong.
>> Mm-hm, know for sure.
>> So I think I've said just about
everything I know about this functional
architecture being Ports-And-Adapters.
Do you have anything else to add?
>> I don't think so.
I'm a little all over the place today.
Just kind of coming out of the food
coma a little bit and yeah.
Yeah it's a little warm in here but
that is what it is.
>> It's Florida I mean.
>> It's Florida but
I also have my fair issues of sweating.
>> At least we're not recording outside.
>> I'm always here for you guys.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Always representing.
But anywho we, this was a great article
it was cool kind of go blast from
the past kind of was all over the place.
But I think because this
Haskell has this identity
that pushes you towards
Ports-And-Adapters.
It makes it really easy to just keep
that logic separate from input and
outputs and all the internal
business logic those things.
It's very important to
keep those separately.
It allows employees who are coming in or
when we revisit a code later,
like understanding like this
is just business logic.
This is the inputs, the outputs,
if you need to change something later,
like Haskell is functional and
it's compiler is amazing.
>> Sure is.
>> And the type system is incredible.
So that really just kind of
all meshes nicely together.
>> Yeah, well said.
So thanks for chatting with me
about Ports-And-Adapters, Cameron.
>> Of course, thanks for having me.
>> It's always great to
have you on the show.
And thank you for
listening to the Haskell Weekly podcast.
If you liked what you heard today,
and want to know more about us,
please check out our website
at haskellweekly.news.
This has been episode ten,
and we'll see you next time.
>> Adios.